Adr/0006 tracing and metrics (#2435)
neicnordic/sensitive-data-archive: docs/decisions/0006-metrics-and-tracing.md

---

> status: accepted

Author: it is to be merged

decision-makers:
  - "@neicnordic/sensitive-data-development-collaboration"
date: "2026-05-20"
---

# Metrics and tracing in the sensitive-data-archive applications

## Context and Problem Statement

Tracing and metrics are helpful tools to be able to monitor and debug a system.

With metrics and tracing the ability to inspect message and request handling is enhanced, this helps support:

> 

Author: nah

## Decision Drivers

* We want to improve the detection of issues or potential problems in the applications.

## Considered Options

* Use [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) for instrumentation, [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) for the metrics export, and [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP) for trace export.

For tracing and metrics no other major affecting options were considered as any other option would be less desirable and most likely require more work.

## Decision Outcome

Chosen option: Use [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) for instrumentation, [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) for the metrics export, and [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP) for trace export.

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is the chosen observability instrumentation, because it's open source, comprehensive, vendor-neutral, and it supports exporting traces in different protocols, eg: [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/), [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/), or [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/).

> [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) is the chosen metrics exporting protocol, because it's a standard and easily integrated in Kubernetes and tools such as Grafana to visualise metrics.

Author: N/A

[OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP) is the chosen tracing protocol over [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/), or [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/), because it's natively supported by the chosen observability instrumentation ([OTel](https://opentelemetry.io/))

> The following diagram shows an example setup where the OTel sdk will export traces to a Grafana Tempo, and expose metrics through a Prometheus endpoint

Author: nah

```mermaid
graph LR

    subgraph App
        app[Application]
        otel[OTel SDK]

>         ps["Prometheus Exporter(HTTP Server)"]

Author: nah

---
status: proposed
decision-makers:
  - "@neicnordic/sensitive-data-development-collaboration"
date: "2026-05-20"
---

> # Metrics and tracing in the sensitive-data-archive applications

Reviewer: I noticed that the title here ("Metrics and tracing in the sensitive-data-archive applications") doesn't match the index entry in the README, which says "Specify Metrics and Tracing technologies". Should we align them? The README version feels more concise to me, but either way works as long as they match.

Author: Updated index entry

With metrics and tracing the ability to inspect message and request handling is enhanced, this helps support:

* Finding where and why requests / message handling fails.
* Finding where and why requests / message handling is unexpectedly slow.
* How the system performance changes depending on load, over time, when new changes are deployed, etc

The sensitive-data-archive applications do not currently collect or export any tracing nor metrics.
The aim of this ADR is to detail which technologies will be used to instrument the collection and exposing/exporting of tracing and metrics in the sensitive-data-archive.

## Decision Drivers

* We want to improve the detection of issues or potential problems in the applications.

## Considered Options

* Use [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) for instrumentation, [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) for the metrics export, and [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP) for trace export.

For tracing and metrics no other major affecting options were considered as any other option would be less desirable and most likely require more work.

## Decision Outcome

> The idea is to implement metrics and tracing collection and exporting through [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) (OTel) which is an open source observability framework.

Reviewer: This does not follow the MADR template and I read it a bit tentative for a decision outcome, Would it be worth rephrasing to match that structure? `Chosen option: "{title}", because {justification}`

Author: Updated, does it read more decisive now?

Reviewer: Much better just a small nit. see the other comment

[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is the chosen observability instrumentation, because it's open source, comprehensive, and vendor-neutral.

> And it supports exporting traces in different protocols, eg: [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/), [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/), or [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) is the chosen observability instrumentation, because it's open source, comprehensive, and vendor-neutral, and supports exporting traces in different protocols, eg: [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/), [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/), or [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/).
```

[Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) is the chosen metrics exporting protocol, because it's a standard and easily integrated in Kubernetes and tools such as Grafana to visualise metrics.

> [OpenTelemetry Protocol](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otlp/) (OTLP) is the chosen tracing protocol, because it's natively supported by the chosen observability instrumentation([OTel](https://opentelemetry.io/))

Reviewer: The reasoning here feels a bit circular.

Author: Yeah I agree it could be understood that way, but what its trying to say, is that for traces we will export them through the OTLP protocol, and not jaeger, zipkin, etc

ie, OTLP != Otel

Author: Updated a bit now to hopefully clarify it abit more

Reviewer: Aha that reads much clearer now, thanks! Makes sense with Jaeger/Zipkin spelled out as the alternatives.

The following diagram shows an example setup where the OTel sdk will export traces to a Grafana Tempo, and expose metrics through a Prometheus endpoint

```mermaid
graph LR

    subgraph App
        app[Application]
        otel[OTel SDK]
        ps["Prometheus Exporter(HTTP Server)"]
    end

    subgraph Observability
        gt[Grafana Tempo]
        pc[Prometheus Collector]
        gd[Grafana Dashboard]
    end

    app -->|Register traces / metrics| otel
    otel -->|Export traces| gt
    otel -->|Expose metrics| ps
    pc -->|Collect Metrics| ps
    gd -->|Query metrics| pc
    gd -->|Query traces| gt
```

The Observability parts in the above diagram are the suggested infrastructure setup, but could be modified by the operator.

### Consequences

* Good, because with traces we can see
  * Total message / request handling duration
  * Time spent in each service
  * Failed spans
  * Slow database queries
  * External API latency
* Good, because with metrics we can monitor
  * Request rate
  * Error rate
  * Latency percentiles

>   * CPU/memory usage

Reviewer: Would the OTel Go SDK actually expose host-level CPU and memory ?

Author: Well no it wont expose the "host" CPU/memory usage , but it can expose the go application runtime metrics 

go.memory.used          By            Memory used by the Go runtime.
go.memory.limit         By            Go runtime memory limit configured by the user, if a limit exists.
go.memory.allocated     By            Memory allocated to the heap by the application.
go.memory.allocations   {allocation}  Count of allocations to the heap by the application.
go.memory.gc.goal       By            Heap size target for the end of the GC cycle.
go.goroutine.count      {goroutine}   Count of live goroutines.
go.processor.limit      {thread}      The number of OS threads that can execute user-level Go code simultaneously.
go.config.gogc          %             Heap size target percentage configured by the user, otherwise 100.

by
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go-contrib/blob/instrumentation/runtime/v0.68.0/instrumentation/runtime/runtime.go#L69

Reviewer: Thanks for the metric list, that clears it up! Not a blocker for this PR, but at some point it might be worth tweaking the bullet to say "Go runtime metrics (heap, GC, goroutines)" so it matches what the SDK actually gives us. Happy to leave it as is for now though.

  * Database connection counts
  * etc
* Bad, because there will be a minor overhead in application from instrumentation
* Bad, because there will be additional infrastructure components to maintain

## More Information

There is a [POC branch](https://github.com/neicnordic/sensitive-data-archive/tree/poc/otel_tracing_and_metrics) (based on quite old version of the sda-stack: v2.1.34) with the described setup.
To test you can run:

1. `make build-all`
2. `make integrationtest-sda-s3-run`
3. You can now go to [locally hosted Grafana](http://localhost:3000) and login with admin:admin
4. On the [Grafana/Explore](http://localhost:3000/explore) you should be able to select Tempo, or Prometheus as source

> 5. You should now be able to see Prometheus metrics and traces in grafana.

Author: N/A, its mentioned just above the steps.
